README.md, before:

# ACME WorldBuilder

World building tool for Asheron's Call. Edit terrain, dungeons, spells, skills, and more — export directly to DAT files.

> **Beta software.** All features are under active development. The newer data editors (Spell, Skill, Vital, Experience, CharGen, SpellSet, Layout) are especially early and have not been thoroughly tested. Expect rough edges, and back up your DAT files before exporting.

> **First run note:** The initial launch will be slower than usual. ACME WorldBuilder builds several caches on first run (textures, thumbnails, terrain data) that persist across sessions. Subsequent launches will be significantly faster.

---

## Features

### Terrain Editing

- **Raise / Lower** — left-click to raise, shift+left-click to lower. Adjustable brush radius (0.5–200) and strength (1–50)
- **Set Height** — paint vertices to a target height (0–255)
- **Smooth** — blend height differences across vertices
- **Texture Brush** — paint terrain textures with a shader-based WYSIWYG preview inside the brush circle
- **Bucket Fill** — flood-fill terrain textures with live preview, constrained to visible landblocks
- **Texture Palette** — visual thumbnail palette that activates with terrain tools
- **Slope Overlay** — highlight unwalkable slopes with configurable threshold (default 45°)

### Roads

- **Point placement** — click individual vertices to set road flags
- **Line drawing** — draw road lines between points
- **Remove** — clear road flags from vertices

### Objects

- **Object Browser** — browse and search the full DAT object catalog (Setups and GfxObjs)
- **Search** — by hex ID or keyword, filter by buildings or scenery
- **Thumbnail previews** — rendered on the GPU, cached to disk across sessions
- **Placement** — click terrain to place, with terrain snap
- **Move / Rotate / Delete** — drag to move, drag to rotate, Delete key to remove
- **Multi-select** — Ctrl+Click or drag a marquee box (full bounding-box testing)
- **Multi-object rotate** — rotate a group of objects around their shared center
- **Copy / Paste** — Ctrl+C / Ctrl+V, supports multi-object paste with offset
- **Right-click context menu** — copy, paste, snap to terrain, delete
- **Properties panel** — edit position (X, Y, Z), rotation (Euler angles), view landcell, snap to terrain
- **Auto height adjustment** — objects stay on the ground when terrain changes beneath them
- **Terrain snap on rotate** — objects maintain ground contact when rotated on slopes
- **Selection highlights** — spheres scale proportionally to object size

### Buildings

- **Building blueprint system** — place buildings with interior cells
- **Move / Rotate** — correctly updates interior cell VisibleCells references
- **Interior toggle** — show or hide building interiors in the viewport

### Terrain Stamps (Clone & Paste)

- **Clone tool** — drag a rectangle to capture terrain heights, textures, and objects
- **Stamp library** — stores up to 10 stamps (configurable, max 50)
- **Paste with rotation** — 0°, 90°, 180°, 270° via `[` and `]` keys
- **Edge blending** — optional smooth blending at stamp borders
- **Include objects** — optionally stamp objects along with terrain
- **Grid snapping** — snaps to the 24-unit cell grid

### Layers

- Full layer system with groups, visibility toggles, and export toggles
- Each layer tracks height, texture, road, and scenery changes independently
- Drag-and-drop reordering and nesting
- Base layer always at bottom (cannot be deleted or reordered)
- Layer compositing for export (top-to-bottom, first non-null wins)

### History & Snapshots

- Undo / redo for all operations (default 50 entries, configurable 5–10,000)
- History panel — click any entry to jump to that state
- Named snapshots that persist between sessions
- Forward entries shown dimmed in the history panel

### Dungeon Editor

- **Room palette** — browse all dungeon environment rooms with 2D cross-section previews
- **Portal snapping** — rooms auto-snap together via portal connections
- **Surface editing** — change wall and floor textures per cell
- **Static objects** — place and move objects inside dungeon cells
- **Copy template** — duplicate a dungeon from one landblock to another
- **Undo / redo** — full history support for dungeon operations

### Spell Editor *(beta)*

- Browse and search all spells by name, school, or type
- Edit spell properties: power, range, duration, components (1–8 slots)
- Icon picker with visual DAT icon browser
- Add and delete spells, save back to SpellTable

### Spell Set Editor *(beta)*

- Edit equipment set spell assignments
- Tiered spell slot management (add/remove tiers and spells per tier)

### Skill Editor *(beta)*

- Browse and filter skills by category (Combat, Magic, Other)
- Edit training costs, formulas (attribute contributions, divisor), bounds, learn mod
- Icon picker, add/delete skills

### Experience Table Editor *(beta)*

- Edit level progression, attribute/vital/skill XP cost tables
- Auto-scale generator with power-curve formulas for quick table generation
- Add/remove levels and ranks

### Vital Table Editor *(beta)*

- Edit Health, Stamina, and Mana formulas
- Configure attribute contributions, divisors, and multipliers
- Live formula preview

### Character Creation Editor *(beta)*

- Edit heritage groups: names, icons, attribute/skill credits, setup models
- 3D model preview for heritage setups with rotation and zoom
- Manage starting areas and spawn locations

### UI Layout Viewer *(beta)*

- Browse all LayoutDesc entries from the DAT
- Element tree hierarchy with property inspector
- Visual preview canvas with selection highlighting

### Custom Textures

- **Terrain texture replacement** — import custom images to replace any terrain type
- **Dungeon surface import** — create new dungeon wall/floor textures
- Exports overwrite existing RenderSurface entries in-place (no DAT corruption)

### DAT Export

- Exports to `client_cell_1.dat`, `client_portal.dat`, `client_highres.dat`, and `client_local_English.dat`
- Configurable portal iteration
- Layer-based export control (toggle which layers are included)
- Overwrite protection

### Camera & Navigation

- **Perspective camera** — WASD + mouse look, Space to go up, Shift to go down
- **Top-down orthographic camera** — pan and zoom, ideal for large-scale editing
- **Toggle** — press Q to switch between modes
- **Go To Landblock** — Ctrl+G, enter a hex ID or X,Y coordinates
- **Location search** — search named locations (towns, dungeons, landmarks) and teleport to them
- **Camera bookmarks** — save and recall camera positions
- **Position HUD** — shows current coordinates in the viewport
- **Grid overlay** — landblock boundaries (magenta) and cell boundaries (cyan)
- **Overlay toggles** — grid, static objects, scenery, dungeons, unwalkable slopes
- Camera position and mode saved between sessions

### Projects

- Point at your base DAT directory, name your project, and go
- Recent projects list on the splash screen
- All project data stored in a local SQLite database

### Performance

- Streaming terrain chunks — only nearby chunks loaded, distant ones unloaded
- Background geometry generation — no frame stalls during terrain loading
- Frustum culling — only visible static objects are rendered
- Two-phase GPU upload — models load in background, upload to GPU in batches
- Texture disk cache — processed RGBA data cached to disk after first load
- Camera-aware streaming — top-down loads the visible rectangle, perspective uses proximity
- Zoom-scaled scenery — trees and rocks appear at appropriate zoom levels, buildings load everywhere
- Load/unload hysteresis — prevents objects flickering at view distance edges
- Distance-prioritized loading — closest landblocks load first
- Capped batch sizes and max loaded landblocks to keep memory and frame times stable

---

## Controls

### Camera

| Action | Key |
|---|---|
| Move forward / back / left / right | W / S / A / D or Arrow Keys |
| Rotate camera (perspective) | Shift + Arrow Keys, or mouse look |
| Move up | Space |
| Move down | Shift (held) |
| Toggle perspective / top-down | Q |
| Zoom in / out | Mouse wheel, or + / - |

### Editing

| Action | Key |
|---|---|
| Go to landblock | Ctrl+G |
| Undo | Ctrl+Z |
| Redo | Ctrl+Shift+Z or Ctrl+Y |
| Copy | Ctrl+C |
| Paste | Ctrl+V |
| Delete | Delete |
| Cancel / deselect | Escape |
| Multi-select | Ctrl+Click |
| Box select | Click and drag |
| Rotate stamp | [ / ] |
| Lower terrain (with raise tool) | Shift+Left-Click |
| Context menu | Right-Click |

---

## Default Settings

| Setting | Default |
|---|---|
| Projects directory | `Documents/ACME WorldBuilder/Projects` |
| History limit | 50 |
| Max draw distance | 4,000 units |
| Field of view | 60° |
| Mouse sensitivity | 1.0 |
| Movement speed | 1,000 units/sec |
| Light intensity | 0.45 |
| Grid visible | Yes |
| Grid opacity | 40% |
| Static objects visible | Yes |
| Scenery visible | Yes |
| Dungeons visible | Yes |
| Building interiors visible | No |
| Slope highlight | Off (threshold 45°) |
| Stamp library size | 10 |

All settings are configurable in the Settings panel and persist between sessions.

---

## Building

Requires .NET 8.0 SDK or later.

```
dotnet build WorldBuilder.slnx
```

## Running

```
dotnet run --project WorldBuilder.Windows
```

Platform-specific projects are also available: `WorldBuilder.Windows` (recommended), `WorldBuilder.Mac`, `WorldBuilder.Linux`.

---

## Thanks

- **Trevis** — original WorldBuilder vision and groundwork (DatReaderWriter + the base that this all grew from, before the big refactor...)
- **Gmriggs** — testing, research, and invaluable AC knowledge
- **Advan** — testing and bug reports
- **Vermino** — PRs and code contributions
- **The AC community** — everyone who has contributed, tested, reported bugs, or just kept Dereth going. If you helped and aren't listed, you know who you are.

Commit message:

Release setup: ACME-WorldBuilderInstall.exe, logo, work flows

README.md, after:

# ACME WorldBuilder

World building tool for Asheron's Call. Edit terrain, dungeons, spells, skills, and more — export directly to DAT files.

---

## Downloads

- **Latest (for testing)** — [Releases → Edge (pre-release)](https://github.com/YOUR_ORG/YOUR_REPO/releases) — automated build from the latest commit. Download **ACME-WorldBuilderInstall-*.exe** and run it.
- **Stable** — [Releases](https://github.com/YOUR_ORG/YOUR_REPO/releases) — pick a versioned release (e.g. v0.1.0) when available.

Replace `YOUR_ORG` and `YOUR_REPO` with your GitHub org/username and repo name. Requires **Windows 10/11**, **.NET 8.0** (installer can prompt to install it). The app can check for updates in-app once installed.

**First-time setup:** If you haven’t set up releases yet, see [RELEASE-SETUP.md](RELEASE-SETUP.md).

---

> **Beta software.** All features are under active development. The newer data editors (Spell, Skill, Vital, Experience, CharGen, SpellSet, Layout) are especially early and have not been thoroughly tested. Expect rough edges, and back up your DAT files before exporting.

> **First run note:** The initial launch will be slower than usual. ACME WorldBuilder builds several caches on first run (textures, thumbnails, terrain data) that persist across sessions. Subsequent launches will be significantly faster.

---

## Features

### Terrain Editing

- **Raise / Lower** — left-click to raise, shift+left-click to lower. Adjustable brush radius (0.5–200) and strength (1–50)
- **Set Height** — paint vertices to a target height (0–255)
- **Smooth** — blend height differences across vertices
- **Texture Brush** — paint terrain textures with a shader-based WYSIWYG preview inside the brush circle
- **Bucket Fill** — flood-fill terrain textures with live preview, constrained to visible landblocks
- **Texture Palette** — visual thumbnail palette that activates with terrain tools
- **Slope Overlay** — highlight unwalkable slopes with configurable threshold (default 45°)

### Roads

- **Point placement** — click individual vertices to set road flags
- **Line drawing** — draw road lines between points
- **Remove** — clear road flags from vertices

### Objects

- **Object Browser** — browse and search the full DAT object catalog (Setups and GfxObjs)
- **Search** — by hex ID or keyword, filter by buildings or scenery
- **Thumbnail previews** — rendered on the GPU, cached to disk across sessions
- **Placement** — click terrain to place, with terrain snap
- **Move / Rotate / Delete** — drag to move, drag to rotate, Delete key to remove
- **Multi-select** — Ctrl+Click or drag a marquee box (full bounding-box testing)
- **Multi-object rotate** — rotate a group of objects around their shared center
- **Copy / Paste** — Ctrl+C / Ctrl+V, supports multi-object paste with offset
- **Right-click context menu** — copy, paste, snap to terrain, delete
- **Properties panel** — edit position (X, Y, Z), rotation (Euler angles), view landcell, snap to terrain
- **Auto height adjustment** — objects stay on the ground when terrain changes beneath them
- **Terrain snap on rotate** — objects maintain ground contact when rotated on slopes
- **Selection highlights** — spheres scale proportionally to object size

### Buildings

- **Building blueprint system** — place buildings with interior cells
- **Move / Rotate** — correctly updates interior cell VisibleCells references
- **Interior toggle** — show or hide building interiors in the viewport

### Terrain Stamps (Clone & Paste)

- **Clone tool** — drag a rectangle to capture terrain heights, textures, and objects
- **Stamp library** — stores up to 10 stamps (configurable, max 50)
- **Paste with rotation** — 0°, 90°, 180°, 270° via `[` and `]` keys
- **Edge blending** — optional smooth blending at stamp borders
- **Include objects** — optionally stamp objects along with terrain
- **Grid snapping** — snaps to the 24-unit cell grid

### Layers

- Full layer system with groups, visibility toggles, and export toggles
- Each layer tracks height, texture, road, and scenery changes independently
- Drag-and-drop reordering and nesting
- Base layer always at bottom (cannot be deleted or reordered)
- Layer compositing for export (top-to-bottom, first non-null wins)

### History & Snapshots

- Undo / redo for all operations (default 50 entries, configurable 5–10,000)
- History panel — click any entry to jump to that state
- Named snapshots that persist between sessions
- Forward entries shown dimmed in the history panel

### Dungeon Editor

- **Room palette** — browse all dungeon environment rooms with 2D cross-section previews
- **Portal snapping** — rooms auto-snap together via portal connections
- **Surface editing** — change wall and floor textures per cell
- **Static objects** — place and move objects inside dungeon cells
- **Copy template** — duplicate a dungeon from one landblock to another
- **Undo / redo** — full history support for dungeon operations

### Spell Editor *(beta)*

- Browse and search all spells by name, school, or type
- Edit spell properties: power, range, duration, components (1–8 slots)
- Icon picker with visual DAT icon browser
- Add and delete spells, save back to SpellTable

### Spell Set Editor *(beta)*

- Edit equipment set spell assignments
- Tiered spell slot management (add/remove tiers and spells per tier)

### Skill Editor *(beta)*

- Browse and filter skills by category (Combat, Magic, Other)
- Edit training costs, formulas (attribute contributions, divisor), bounds, learn mod
- Icon picker, add/delete skills

### Experience Table Editor *(beta)*

- Edit level progression, attribute/vital/skill XP cost tables
- Auto-scale generator with power-curve formulas for quick table generation
- Add/remove levels and ranks

### Vital Table Editor *(beta)*

- Edit Health, Stamina, and Mana formulas
- Configure attribute contributions, divisors, and multipliers
- Live formula preview

### Character Creation Editor *(beta)*

- Edit heritage groups: names, icons, attribute/skill credits, setup models
- 3D model preview for heritage setups with rotation and zoom
- Manage starting areas and spawn locations

### UI Layout Viewer *(beta)*

- Browse all LayoutDesc entries from the DAT
- Element tree hierarchy with property inspector
- Visual preview canvas with selection highlighting

### Custom Textures

- **Terrain texture replacement** — import custom images to replace any terrain type
- **Dungeon surface import** — create new dungeon wall/floor textures
- Exports overwrite existing RenderSurface entries in-place (no DAT corruption)

### DAT Export

- Exports to `client_cell_1.dat`, `client_portal.dat`, `client_highres.dat`, and `client_local_English.dat`
- Configurable portal iteration
- Layer-based export control (toggle which layers are included)
- Overwrite protection

### Camera & Navigation

- **Perspective camera** — WASD + mouse look, Space to go up, Shift to go down
- **Top-down orthographic camera** — pan and zoom, ideal for large-scale editing
- **Toggle** — press Q to switch between modes
- **Go To Landblock** — Ctrl+G, enter a hex ID or X,Y coordinates
- **Location search** — search named locations (towns, dungeons, landmarks) and teleport to them
- **Camera bookmarks** — save and recall camera positions
- **Position HUD** — shows current coordinates in the viewport
- **Grid overlay** — landblock boundaries (magenta) and cell boundaries (cyan)
- **Overlay toggles** — grid, static objects, scenery, dungeons, unwalkable slopes
- Camera position and mode saved between sessions

### Projects

- Point at your base DAT directory, name your project, and go
- Recent projects list on the splash screen
- All project data stored in a local SQLite database

### Performance

- Streaming terrain chunks — only nearby chunks loaded, distant ones unloaded
- Background geometry generation — no frame stalls during terrain loading
- Frustum culling — only visible static objects are rendered
- Two-phase GPU upload — models load in background, upload to GPU in batches
- Texture disk cache — processed RGBA data cached to disk after first load
- Camera-aware streaming — top-down loads the visible rectangle, perspective uses proximity
- Zoom-scaled scenery — trees and rocks appear at appropriate zoom levels, buildings load everywhere
- Load/unload hysteresis — prevents objects flickering at view distance edges
- Distance-prioritized loading — closest landblocks load first
- Capped batch sizes and max loaded landblocks to keep memory and frame times stable

---

## Controls

### Camera

| Action | Key |
|---|---|
| Move forward / back / left / right | W / S / A / D or Arrow Keys |
| Rotate camera (perspective) | Shift + Arrow Keys, or mouse look |
| Move up | Space |
| Move down | Shift (held) |
| Toggle perspective / top-down | Q |
| Zoom in / out | Mouse wheel, or + / - |

### Editing

| Action | Key |
|---|---|
| Go to landblock | Ctrl+G |
| Undo | Ctrl+Z |
| Redo | Ctrl+Shift+Z or Ctrl+Y |
| Copy | Ctrl+C |
| Paste | Ctrl+V |
| Delete | Delete |
| Cancel / deselect | Escape |
| Multi-select | Ctrl+Click |
| Box select | Click and drag |
| Rotate stamp | [ / ] |
| Lower terrain (with raise tool) | Shift+Left-Click |
| Context menu | Right-Click |

---

## Default Settings

| Setting | Default |
|---|---|
| Projects directory | `Documents/ACME WorldBuilder/Projects` |
| History limit | 50 |
| Max draw distance | 4,000 units |
| Field of view | 60° |
| Mouse sensitivity | 1.0 |
| Movement speed | 1,000 units/sec |
| Light intensity | 0.45 |
| Grid visible | Yes |
| Grid opacity | 40% |
| Static objects visible | Yes |
| Scenery visible | Yes |
| Dungeons visible | Yes |
| Building interiors visible | No |
| Slope highlight | Off (threshold 45°) |
| Stamp library size | 10 |

All settings are configurable in the Settings panel and persist between sessions.

---

## Building

Requires .NET 8.0 SDK or later.

```
dotnet build WorldBuilder.slnx
```

## Running

```
dotnet run --project WorldBuilder.Windows
```

Platform-specific projects are also available: `WorldBuilder.Windows` (recommended), `WorldBuilder.Mac`, `WorldBuilder.Linux`.

---

## Thanks

- **Trevis** — original WorldBuilder vision and groundwork (DatReaderWriter + the base that this all grew from, before the big refactor...)
- **Gmriggs** — testing, research, and invaluable AC knowledge
- **Advan** — testing and bug reports
- **Vermino** — PRs and code contributions
- **The AC community** — everyone who has contributed, tested, reported bugs, or just kept Dereth going. If you helped and aren't listed, you know who you are.
